---
title:
created: 2011-05-28 16:45
---

in this world of social networks where we are so connected and feel
like we're part of a community, it seems we're even more self-centered
than ever.

i am sure most everyon has had experiences where something online has
come back to haunt them in real life.  normally it's just that your
friend is mad at you because of some comment, but there are plenty of
cases where people forgot someone was on their friends list, said
something stupid, and ended up getting fired.

first off, you can listen to the latest version of [back to work][b2w]
where merlin mann or dan mention something about how the word _friend_
gets thrown around online so much but is being abused.  what is a
friend?  you can't go through your list of so-called "friends" on
facebook and say they're all _really_ your friends.  merlin's question
-- would you give them a ride to the airport?  my question -- would
you help all of them move?  so first off, lets agree that friends on
facebook are truly **weak** friends in the truest sense.

one of my experiences was when i decided that i was going to do some
in-friend cleaning.  i defriended a friend of a friend i don't hang
out with ever.  i mean, why do we need to be connected?  what would be
the point?  anyways, it was inconsequential enough that when we
randomly ran into each other at a show sometime later, i had totally
forgotten that i had done it.  and i was in deep shit.  i mean, i
don't blame anyone for feeling they way they do, i just can't
understand it.  i am _one_ person out of however many you have and my
choice to remove someone was not a personal attack.  it doen't mean i
think you're an asshole.  it means i don't hang out with you and so
anything i would have to say to you, if it was important, i could
message you.  we don't interact on a daily basis in real life, why
should we interact on an online network.  anyways, i stay away from
facebook as much as possible so it wasn't like they were missing some
awesome stuff coming from me.



