---
title: Is Apple Playing the Startup Game?
posted: 2010-01-08 11:54:34
modified: 2011-02-02 17:32:30
created: 2011-02-02 17:49:46
---
What would be the easiest way to keep a secret about an upcoming
device? <em>The device not to exist!</em>

<em><span style="font-style: normal;">I recently read an article by
Paul Graham, <a href="http://www.paulgraham.com/really.html"
target="_blank">What Startups Are Really Like</a> and he notes that
one of the suggestions is to release early and get customer
feedback. What if you didn't even have to release?</span></em>

For a second lets think about what happened with the iPhone. There was
a lot of speculation before January 2007, and then iPhone came to
MacWorld with a magical device that no one had seen before and didn't
even have them ready for release until June 2007. Even then they ran
out. I don't have a clear history of the time before January 2007
because I didn't pay attention to Apple news back then but I imagine
it's very similar to the rumors and speculation that has been flooding
the Mac community since early December.

Lets say Apple decided in October / November that the technology was
ready for an Apple phone. Rumors started to spread but initially
trickled. As Apple is designing hardware they put out different little
bits of rumors here and there, parts manufacturers let it slip that
Apple is buying parts, patents starting making headlines etc., but
Apple at this point has no actual phone. And then what does Apple do?
It listens. It puts it's collective ears to the track and starts
hearing what people are speculating about. Gathering ideas? In
December they start developing a weak layer of software and hardware
to support it, ready for January of 2007. Think about it. Apple didn't
have to even give people hands-on demos or anything. I'm not saying
they hadn't tested the feasibility of the device, I just think as far
as features go, the community fed them to Apple. All they had to do
was simply show a thin layer of design for key features on this
magical mystery device. As long as they could commit to their
promises, it didn't have to even be ready for release. Remember that
even in June they hadn't manufactured enough to meet demand. The first
OS for the original iPhone wasn't *that* feature-full, but it met
speculations and was executed well! Six months is plenty of time for a
company with Apple's level of resources to develop the software for
the phone they promised in January. Interesting enough, the 3G was a
completely new, more compact, design which even included a 3G radio,
leading me to believe the initial hardware design was done in a bit of
haste (where they didn't consider that the metal backing of the
original iPhone affecting radio signal strength). To their credit,
excellent execution.

As for an upcoming tablet-like device, they don'tnecessarilyeven have
this new device in hand right now. There are tidbits that say "You
will be very surprised how you interact with the new tablet," and it
doesn't take much for people to run with that idea and come up with
even newer ideas. They could be working on it as I type this and
implementing key features that <a
href="http://daringfireball.net/2010/01/tablet_musings"
target="_blank">experts</a> and the community are saying the device
needs to beat the competition. Doesn't anyone else think it's weird
that they could keep such secrets? Steve Jobs couldn't even keep his
health problems a secret. There is just no secret to keep! It's also
interesting their event is now two weeks<em>after</em> CES where the
competition is presenting their sub-par tablet devices? I'd say two
weeks is plenty of time to implement some last-ditch ideas, especially
ones you don't have to immediately release to the public.

Apple is agile and Ibelieve this is something they do best, and for
that fact what GM does worst. And what has the entire Apple community
been providing over the last month but providing excellent ideas. Why
notjust let the customers decide what they want and then execute their
ideas?

If the device is ready for release on the 27th, this whole article is
moot, but I could still be right about the iPhone :)

EDIT: Just so this is clear. I have been informed that there are many
iterations that the iPhone went through so it wasn't a turnaround of
6months. But it also doesn't mean they're not keeping an open ear, but
this is somewhat obvious within constraints. SDK was a request from
the users, but maybe it was always planned.
