---
title: The Rug is not the Issue
---
In an attempt to collect and process all my thoughts from my first
semester teaching I started to write them out. Instead of just pushing
them into some directory, I've decided to post them for *some number*
of reasons like: (i) it means I really need to think about what I'm
saying, believe it, and possibly back it up with anecdotal evidence,
(ii) I need to revise, (iii) it means I can get feedback from others,
hopefully not my boss with a pink slip, and (iv) it may be useful to
others.

<!-- I have lots of thoughts, we all do, and my initial idea was to put -->
<!-- them all into one giant file and let people trudge through it. But I -->
<!-- am now about 1/4 of the way through and I decided it will probably be -->
<!-- too cumbersome by the time I am done; lets do installments (or as we -->
<!-- say in networks: *segments*). -->

This is the first section I wrote up, and may be the most important,
as it is about expectations. We all have at least one expectation of
other people -- I expect you will not come out of a dark corner and
stab me because you like my coffee mug -- but many times they go
unsaid. The important distinction to make is that *expectations* and
*responsibilities* are two different things.

To me an expectation is just something that one or more persons
expects to happen; I expect that the Sun will rise tomorrow. Does that
mean an expectation will always happen? Probably, but it may not. I
expect my cell phone will work anywhere I go, but sometimes that
doesn't happen.

On the other hand, a responsibility is something that one or more
persons has control over and in some way accountable for. I am
responsible for whether or not I jump out of a dark corner and stab
someone for their coffee mug (love coffee mugs). I have control over
my jumping and stabbing, I am accountable for taking that action if
I decide to do it. And sure, as a society we mostly agree about this
*expectation*,
that's why there is a law about stab jumping. But that's irrelevant really.

Interestingly, even though our expectations may change, like if we
move to New York or Chicago, responsibility doesn't.

So maybe a responsibility and an expectation are unrelated. But as far
as the professor-student relationship goes, I have expectations of my
students -- carefully chosen to try and set goals which, if
accomplished, should result in an increase in knowledge or ability --
and the students are responsible for reaching those expectations or
not. Similarly, the student has some level of expectation of the
professor to facilitate the learning experience -- lecturing,
providing problems, answering questions -- and the professor is
responsible for meeting those expectations or not. And the best I can
come up with is that each party is only responsible for the things
they can control in order to reach an expectation.

There are two reasons that expectations cannot be met: they are
impossible to meet, commonly known as *unreasonable expectations*, or
they are unknown. It seems there is an unspoken *college* contract
that students and professors enter in to, but there isn't always
clearly defined *expectations*. So what I have tried to do is to
outline what I think are general expectations I have of students and
the expectations that I have of professors (myself).

Bing Bong.


# Expectations for Students

It's hard to jump into teaching, have expectations for students, not
*know* explicitly what those expectations are, and then have the
students do them.  This is probably one of the biggest problems with
people in general; we set expectations for other people, they don't
know we have those expectations, they fail to meet those expectations,
and then we blame them.  In my first semester I expect that I haven't
made these explicit and so I have been fairly lenient.   However, I
feel like now I have a better sense of what those expectaitons are.


## [RTFM]

[RTFM]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RTFM

You can ask all the questions you want but at some point you have to
start thinking about how to answer your own questions. In some ways
professors are a crutch. You've heard it a million times: your professor
won't be there forever and your [boss at your job][baddays] is paying
you to be the question answerer. So as a student, know that sometimes
the answer is that you need to look it up.

[baddays]: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7daZK2gPDQM

There are numerous times that I am looking through code for a student
and I ask what an argument is doing. It's OK for the student to not
know the answer; it's *not* OK for the student to not switch to a
browser or another terminal and search for the function or lookup the
`man` page. Most of the time I'd have to go look it up also. But the
problem is normally that I would've went and looked it up before using
it -- out of habit from years of asking questions on IRC -- and the
student will just guess and then when it doesn't work ask the
instructor.

If you go and look things up, find some semblance of an answer, and
then don't understand it, then it's time to bring in the real firepower.

see also: [Be Responsible](#be-responsible)


## Ask Questions

Being a student means being interested in *something* and wanting to
learn about it because you need to solve a problem or answer a
question. Learning means acquiring knowledge about *something*. And I
truly believe the only way you can *really* learn about something is
to dig in and resolve any questions you might have about that
*something*.

So there are two ways to think about this; you should always ask
questions. If you (the student) know the material perfectly, then it's
your responsibility to yourself to ask a question and see what someone
else thinks about it -- and then correct them when they're wrong. If
you don't know the material then you should have lots of questions. If
you don't have questions you're not thinking about it hard enough.

I am not a Sun expert but I can come up with plenty of questions about
it: What kind of firepower would it take to blow up the sun? Would
earth be destroyed as a result?

Unfortunately, there aren't *dumb* questions. There are just *better*
questions. If you're talking about microwaves, it doesn't make sense
to ask, "how do I make ice cubes with a microwave?" A better question
would be to ask, "what does a microwave do?"

If you're a student reading this and don't buy my explanation: do it
just to suck up to your professor.


## Give **an** answer

Sure, there is *always a better way* of doing things.  Even when we
think we have found the best way there is probably always a better
way.  Just because we don't know about a better way right now doesn't
mean that it doesn't exist.  How can you say that?

> *The enemy of the good is the perfect.*

I guess this is from [La Bégueule][] by [Voltaire][], but I will always
attribute it to a friend of mine.  This helped to push me from my OCD
of spending inordinate amounts of times trying to make things perfect.
It also keeps me from tweaking my [Emacs config][dotemacs] and
[dot files][dotfiles] too much.

The one thing that annoys me the most as a professor is students being
*afraid* to answer a question or take the risk on an answer;
especially when the student knows the answer! Students need to
remember we're all really stupid about something. Hell, I'm the
professor and half the stuff we do in the class I have to refresh my
memory on (except for facts about the Sun). Plus, as much as I don't
want to be, I'm wrong all the time. In fact, sometimes that's my
responsibility (see [Be Wrong](#be-wrong)). The only other thing that
annoys me -- slightly less -- is when students answer in a soft voice.
And the only reason this annoys me is because I spent too many years
playing loud rock and roll music and can't hear.

Any band instructor and they will tell you: if you're going to screw
up, screw up like you meant it; with confidence!


[Voltaire]: http://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/Voltaire
[La Bégueule]: http://fr.wikisource.org/wiki/La_Bégueule
[dotfiles]: https://github.com/milkypostman/dotfiles
[dotemacs]: https://github.com/milkypostman/dotemacs

## Don't take it personally

If you get an answer wrong, don't take it personally if the professor
tells you it's not a good answer to the question.  It's really not
personal.  Use your frustration -- from either *having* to answer the
question or getting it wrong -- to motivate yourself to understand how
you could've possibly gotten that answer wrong.  Then learn the
material better than the professor and do the following,


## Prove the professor wrong

It's the professors responsibility to [be wrong](#be-wrong).  So make it easy on
them and challenge them, [question them](#ask-questions).


## Be Responsible

The number one thing a student should demonstrate is that they deserve
the right to vote in an election of the United States president; *be
responsible*.  I am a very irresponsible person -- I know that it's
not the most fun thing in the world -- and I manage by putting
reminders in my phone and calendar for everything that I have to do,
along with poorly maintaining my own hack of [GTD] management.  It has
been semi-successful.  Regardless, it sucks to have to be responsible
but you have to do it because otherwise you're bothering other people.
Plus you're really making things harder than they need to be.  I
believe if Facebook had a calendar feature much of this could be
alleviated.

[GTD]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Getting_Things_Done

Students are not alone. It is important to remember *both* the
professor and the student need to be responsible in the learning
experience. Responsibility is not about blame, it's about
acknowledging control over the situation. And really there are so many
resources available (Google, libraries, classmates, professors,
tutors, etc.) that it's easy to be responsible. It's just a matter of
actually *being* responsible that is the hard part. The challenge is
figure out what way of being responsible works for you. Maybe you
don't like talking to the professor but Google works, then no
problemo, use Google. If that *doesn't* work, then you have to try
other means.

And hey, sometimes being responsible means talking to the professor
about *their* expectations of the students.

## Self Evaluate

I think that in most cases the students I've had are pretty accurate
in their evaluations of their performance. Surprising to me is that
students don't complain about really low grades on assignments,
projects, or exams. The ones that tend to question the grading tend to
be students that already have an A but want a better A -- probably the
reason they have an A to begin with[^1] -- so remember to
[ask questions](#ask-questions).

What is more interesting though is that students tended to
over-estimated their ability before a test. Yet, after the test, most
didn't really feel unjustified in the way the test was graded.  And
most of the points weren't taken off because of problems remembering
facts, but from not thinking things through or having a
conceptualization of the material.  Possibly this was caused by
students having their *first* exam with me and not knowing what to
expect.  Only the final exam will tell.

Throughout the semester it's probably a good idea to stop and think --
I know its hard -- about how you are doing.  It doesn't hurt to go in
and ask the instructor either.  Students should remember that
assignments are really just the professor evaluating the student from
their point of view.  In fact, the professor could be wrong; many times
they are.  But a student should take that information and consider
*why* they were evaluated in that way. This should lead to insight
into how the student can next time self-evaluate their work.  If only
students came pre-built with the habit of self-evaluating their
assignment and then revising.  But in most cases we know that students
work on homework the night before it's due -- likely an hour before
it's due -- meaning their is no time for evaluation.

The whole thing of evaluation is painful, but like writing, as you
do it more you do it, the more likely you'll get it right the first
time in the future and not need as much revising.  It gets easier and
becomes natural.

[^1]: they care.

## TCB

Most importantly: *[take care of business.][tcbutube]*

[tcbutube]: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r4sI5DG5sjc


# Expectations of the Professor



## [RTFM]

The same business applies for professors.  Be engaged in the topic.
If the professor isn't interested in the topic -- especially when
students propose fascinating questions that should be answered for the
sake of humanity -- then how can the students be.

This also covers the expectation that professors be *enthusiastic*.

## Don't be a *professor*

Professors should really be expected to be *model students*.
Professor is a poor term; they should be called *scholars* in the in
the archaic sense: *a student*.

## Timing

The biggest downfall I had my first semester was that my timing was a
hot mess. I winged it [^wingit] and it turned out a bit like
[spaghetti code](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spaghetti_code). Sure,
it accomplished the goal, but it's not something I'll turn to in order
to guide the class again. At the same time it feels like a necessary
evil. Figure out how to climb a mountain by climbing a mountain.

[^wingit]: (wung it?  what's the past-tense of wing?)


## Organize

Sure, I shouldn't sit around all day planning and not getting anything
done, but next time I teach need to plan out the semester more
thoroughly. I still haven't decided if I could have done more detailed
planning for
the first semester -- likely I could have -- but I did learn a lot by
leaving it somewhat open.

Mostly I learned about
[pacing](#speed-up) and how quickly material can be digested. This has
given me a sense of how I can distribute the material temporally
throughout the semester.   One thing I grossly
underestimated was the time required by students to do various
[classwork](#classwork). Although some of that is needing to push the
students more, especially at the beginning of the semester.

Still, *remember to organize*.


## Speed Up!

I took things way too slow. There are lots of reasons that I believe
this and part was fear of running out of material. The other was
thinking that I needed to discuss all the details. What I have
realized is that it's really the student's responsibility to
[read](#rtfm) and [learn](#ask-questions) about the details, and the
expectation on the professor is to facilitate the learning of the
knowledge students attempt to acquire; help them understand the
important details when they don't.


## Let Learning Dictate Structure

I now believe it's more important that students gain skills in
learning as opposed to trying to cover a particular box of material.
As professors we should use the material as a tool to teach learning.
If students can learn they can learn the material later.

What I have also found is that in certain subjects -- like Computer
Science (CS) -- there are many repeated *themes*.  For instance, in
Operating Systems we learn about the problem of synchronizing a cache
for a processor. This same type of issue with syncing appears when we
talk about multiprocessor systems.  For non-CS people, think about
learning coordination for riding a bicycle; it's the same problem as
riding a motorcycle even though they are different machines.  OK,
maybe not the best example but I'm sure you can find an example from
any discipline.  The same theme is all over the Computer Networks area
but I'll spare the details.

Regardless, figure out what you want to instill in the students over
the course of the semester and let that dictate the structure of the
class; how you present the material.








