---
title: The Bing and The iPhone
posted: 2010-12-15 22:59:38
modified: 2010-12-17 09:37:50
created: 2011-02-02 17:49:46
---
If an iPhone searches in a forest and no one hears, does it still Bing?

Oh man that was so stupid.  Tonight I decided to move the Bing app to my iPhones front page.  In part because I heard [Leo Laporte](http://leoville.com/) mention it was in the top downloads for iPhone and because I started read [this](http://www.wired.com/epicenter/2010/12/bing-google-differences/) article.  The app has always been on my phone but when you got the Goog there, you think, "the Goog MUST be the app for me, there is no way Bing from Microsoft could be better!"  Well, I did anyways.  But I have to say that I can definitely see myself using it more than the Google app especially with its easy access to specialized sections: movies, weather, social networking, etc.  I've started to learn some tricks the more I use it and while there is a bit of a learning curve to use it well, to me it could be my one stop when I need information (supposedly the goal with the Window Phone 7 also).  But the biggest reason: voice search on maps.  It's amazing!

When I was in junior high I did a report on Microsoft because I was a huge computer nerd and a total fanboy, yet after that report I can't remember having anything nice to publicly say about the company, until now.  OK, that's not completely fair, Windows XP was great but I started to not care so much cause I was digging into my Linux hole.  Now, being an Apple Zealot, it's hard for me to admit I'm enjoying a Microsoft product.  The endorsement should hold water.  Anyways, I could wax intellectual about the little differences I like about the Bing app but that's moot to what I'm about to launch into, so just go try it out.  The bigger thing I was thinking recently is that Bing has a big opportunity on the iPhone.  And at the same time they are between Iraq and a hard place.

The Bing search app is already way more useful than the Google app.  This is great for the Bing search engine; people who like the search engine may, like me, give the desktop version of the search engine a shot.  Sure, Google maps is integrated into the iPhone core software deck and it's RIGHT THERE but it's been heavily neglected.  One of the main things being the ability to search Google Maps using voice -- figure out for yourself why its an important feature.  As well, Android users get free turn by turn directions but, as far as I know, iPhone users need to shell out some reasonably big bucks (at least $20 dollars?) to get decent turn by turn navigation.  Well, i guess [it's coming soon.](http://mashable.com/2010/04/22/free-turn-by-turn-google-directions-iphone/)  Now, Bing maps doesn't have turn by turn navigation BUT their maps app does have voice search and I imagine they could get on that turn by turn stuff if they wanted to.  If they did implement that, it would be pretty good publicity for a company that is competing against Apple in the computer market.  Regardless, my early impressions are that the Bing maps experience is just nicer.  I do know that it's easier to get directions going once you find a place, views are nicer, and it seems faster to download maps.  The overarching point is that Bing has an opportunity to hone in on the iPhone user market, which Google seems to have neglected.  And while Google has done a good job of creating mobile web apps for their services, I think it is clear that powerful apps are what iPhone users want.

What Bing needs to do is learn from Google's mistake with the Apple market.  It seems like Google went the road of putting money into web apps that ran on compatible mobile WebKit browsers because they wanted their work to benefit iPhone users and Android users.  At the same time they need Android to be better than iOS, because that's their business now, and so the work they did put into apps was focused on the Android platform.  Who can blame them?  But it's ignoring a large part of their interested population.  I imagine that most iPhone users use Google at home and even in Safari, and yet they are really at war with the iOS platform.  Bing is now in the same boat because Windows Phone 7 (or whatever it's officially called) is a competitor with iOS devices, just like Android.  So you have Windows Phone backed by MS which controls Bing, Android backed by the Goog which controls Google, and Apple is sitting out there kinda looking at Google, Yahoo!, and Bing just doing whatever falls in its lap.  What motivation does Google or Microsoft now have to enhance a phone when they now have their own phones to work on?  Without delving more into all this, a topic which I'm not as knowledgable as I wish I was, I think that people who use iPhones are loyal.  If one of these search companies were to show they care about the iPhone for the sake of it's users, they are more likely to convert iPhone users to their search engine or even their phone than if they were to create a cool commercial laundry list features.

It's what I would describe as "paying your dues."  *The check is in the mail.*
